---
layout: post
title: "Building a compiler"
category: example2
---

This spring I took a course titled "Translation of Programming Languages" at UC Santa Barbara. This was the standard compiler class for undergraduates at our school. I believe I spent the most time on this class out of every class I've taken at UCSB, and in lieu of hosting a public repository (which another student confirmed would not be possible after the course), I would like to document my experience with building a compiler from the top down in C++ with my team of roommates (henceforth called A and B) for a toy language called "c flat."
### Lexer
Roommate A drew up a few NFA graphs to emulate the behavior of the lexer, while I built a map from syntax to operator names and wired the nodes together on the .cpp file and Roommate B wrote a function to find and print whether the lexer had reached an accepting state. After a few test runs with our apartment's 65-inch TV, we submitted our code to the autograder for the first time. I noted that most of the issues that came up after our initial submission were because the algorithm did not account for the End Of File situation, which helped us determine how to rework the logic in the lexer file. We finished this assignment, the first part of the compiler, in a single night.
### LL1 Parser + Validator
Usually this section would have been broken up across two assignments (as was the case the previous time this course was offered). However, we had only one and a half weeks to complete both. 

This parser was to be LL(1); that is, it would parse a language without left-recursion and would have a deterministic (no epsilon transitions) lookahead of 1 character to determine which state to enter. Before designing functions to trace the program using the tokens generated from the previous assignment as input, we coded an AST file of structs that would also facilitate coding for the validator and associated type checking. To make the code more intuitive, the AST was constructed of structs that represented distinct members of a program, such as "Exp" for expressions and "Lval" for left-hand values, which themselves contained pointers to structs defined for each specific type under that umbrella, such as "ExpCall" or "LvalFieldAccess." This organizational structure allowed us to scaffold concise, readable, and efficient logic for the parser to narrow down which element each input represents.

The validator and type checker demanded much more forethought and work. I and Roommate B had previous experience designing type-checkers in lambda calculus, but the sheer scale of this project meant every error was much more time-consuming to catch and bugs in the logic required multiple pairs of eyes to trace and fix. The night before this project was due, we all pledged to stay awake until the type checker was complete. Much of the resultant code for the type-checker involved understanding when to make a recursive call to a function and when to iterate until another type was discovered at the far end of nested pointers, and updating the gamma (type environment) to ensure that the types of elements within the current scope could be properly identified. 

In the afternoon of the final day, we had finally passed the last test case. I checked the course Slack to see if there had been any updates our team needed to pay attention to. Just a few minutes before we finished, the professor had extended the due date to 3 days later because so few students were able to complete the assignment. My roommates and I were in the first 10 students in the class to do so.
### Lowering
Taking the output of the parser and validator (and with them, no longer needing to catch most errors in the code given as input), our task this time was to lower the elements of the code into an LIR (low-level intermediate representation) data structure. This involved creating a control flow graph for the code by understanding where branches and jumps were necessary to run whatever the code represented. To do this, we needed to add labels for blocks of code reachable from a certain instruction, and add every instruction to a translation vector that we could reference later to track where in the control flow graph the program was heading. Once the final CFG was constructed, all that was left to do was to trace through the program and remove every extraneous, unreachable block of code given to the compiler.
### Code Generation
The final step in this top-down approach was to take the LIR data structure and translate the code to assembly. This was much simpler than the previous parts and involved little more than printing out the proper assembly syntax for each LIR instruction.
### LIR Optimization
Backing up a step and revisiting the output of the lowering process, our final task was to optimize the LIR data structure such that its control flow graph would be as efficient to run as possible. This involved applying arithmetic identities to many Copy(), Branch(), and other arithmetic commands to simplify instructions to the minimum needed to execute the logic of the sample program. Here, I specifically contributed a function to replace variables with appropriately matching constant values so that instructions would no longer need to reference variables after optimization, which significantly expanded the number of test cases my team was able to pass.

Ironically, most of our time and effort for the LIR optimizer was spent optimizing our own logic to make it run as quickly as possible (most of our test cases failed because of timeouts). Printing was streamlined to append substrings to a base string and print a single final result, automatic types were kept to a minimum, and every parameter was passed as a reference.

This was one of the most rigorous project series I have completed at university and I am glad to have learned the foundations of compilers and how to design them to be both accurate and efficient at processing code. Most importantly, I have gained a much clearer understanding of my work ethic and how I can best put it to use as a part of a well-coordinated and productive team. 